# M103 - Basic Cluster Administration

## Mongod Options
- Database are stored.
    - `mongod --dbpath <directory path>`
- Port mongod will listen.
    - `mongod --port <port number>`
- Run with auth.
    - `mongod --auth`
- Specify IP addresses mongod should bind to.
    - `mongod --bind_ip <IP1,IP2,...>`
- Specify a replica set name.
    - `mongod --replSet <setname>`
- Create the log file at the path specify.
    - `mongod --logpath <path>`
- Configuration file.
    - `mongod --config <path>`
- Specifies the path to a key file that stores the shared secret that MongoDB instances use to authenticate to each other in a sharded cluster or replica set.
    - `mongod --keyFile <file>`
- Specifies the .pem file that contains both the TLS/SSL certificate and key.
    - `mongod --sslPEMKeyFile <filename>`
- Enables TLS/SSL or mixed TLS/SSL used for all network connections.
    - `mongod --sslMode <disabled|allowSSL|preferSSL|requireSSL>`
- Enables TLS/SSL or mixed TLS/SSL used for all network connections, in mongod version >= 4.2.
    - `mongod --tlsMode <disabled|allowSSL|preferSSL|requireSSL>`
- Enables a daemon mode that runs the mongod process in the background.
    - `mongod --fork`

### Configuration file
```yml
storage:
    dbPath: /var/mongodb/db/
net:
    port: 27000
    bindIp: localhost,192.168.103.100
security:
    authorization: enabled
systemLog:
    destination: file
    path: /var/mongodb/db/mongod.log
    logAppend: true
processManagement:
    fork: true
# The database profiler collects detailed information about Database Commands executed against a running mongod instance.
operationProfiling:
    mode: slowOp
    slowOpThresholdMs: 50
```


## Server tools
- [mongostat][mongostat]
    - Quick overview of the status of a currently running mongod or mongos instance.
- [mongodump][mongodump]
    - Creating a binary export of the contents of a database.
- [mongorestore][mongorestore]
    - Loads data from either a binary database dump created by mongodump.
- [mongoexport][mongoexport]
    - Produces a JSON or CSV export of data stored in a MongoDB instance.
- [mongoimport][mongoimport]
    - Imports content from an Extended JSON, CSV, or TSV export created by mongoexport, or potentially, another third-party export tool.

Example
```bash
mongoimport --port 27000 --authenticationDatabase admin -u m103-application-user -p m103-application-pass --db applicationData --collection products --file /dataset/products.json
```


## Mongo basic command

- Databases method.
    - `db.<method>()`
    - `db.<collection>.<method>()`
- Replica set method.
    - `rs.<method>()`
- Shared method.
    - `sh.<method>()`

- User Management
    - `db.createUser()`
    - `db.dropUser()`
    - `db.getUsers()`

- Collection Mangement
    - `db.renameCollection()`
    - `db.collection.createIndex()`
    - `db.collection.drop()`

- Database Mangement
    - `db.dropDatabase()`
    - `db.createCollection()`

- Database Status
    - `db.serverStatus()`

- Database Command
    - `db.runCommand({ <COMMAND> })`
    - `db.commandHelp({ "<COMMAND>" })`
- Database Log info
    - Configuration log level
        - `db.getLogComponents()`
    - Show logs
        - `db.adminCommand({ "getLog": "global|rs|startupWarnings" })`


### Create user in mongo
```js
db.createUser({
    user: "m103-admin",
    pwd: "m103-pass",
    roles: [{ role: "root", db: "admin" }]
})
```


### Built-In roles
- Role Structure:
    - Role is composed of
        - Set of Privileges
            - Actions -> Resources
        - Network Authentication Restrictions
            - clientSource
            - serverAddress

### Roles by default
- Database User
    - read
    - readWrite
- Database Administration
    - [dbAdmin][dbAdmin]
        - Provides the ability to perform administrative tasks such as schema-related tasks, indexing, and gathering statistics.
    - [userAdmin][userAdmin],
        - We should always create a user with this role. This role handles roles and users.
    - [dbOwner][dbOwner]
        - The database owner can perform any administrative action on the database. Combined **readWrite + dbAdmin + userAdmin**
- Cluster Administration
    - clusterAdmin
    - clusterManager
    - clusterMonitor
    - hostManager
- Backup/Restore
    - backup
    - restore
- Super User (All Database)
    - root
- All Database
    - readAnyDatabase
    - readWriteAnyDatabase
    - dbAdminAnyDatabase
    - userAdminAnyDatabase

### Resources
- Database
- Collection
- Set of Collections
- Cluster:
    - Replica Set
    - Shard Cluster

Examples:
```js
// specific database and collection
{ db: "products", collection: "inventory" }

// all databases and all collections
{ db: "", collection: "" }

// any database and specific collection
{ db: "", collection: "accounts" }

// specific database and any collection
{ db: "products", collection: "" }

// cluster resource
{ cluster: true }

// Grant role to user
db.grantRolesToUser( "dba",  [ { db: "playground", role: "dbOwner"  } ] )

// Show role privileges
db.runCommand( { rolesInfo: { role: "dbOwner", db: "playground" }, showPrivileges: true} )
```


## Create a Replica Set

- To secure this replica set, you will create a keyfile for your nodes to use when communicating with each other.

```sh
sudo mkdir -p /var/mongodb/pki
sudo chown USER_NAME:USER_NAME -R /var/mongodb
openssl rand -base64 741 > /var/mongodb/pki/m103-keyfile
chmod 400 /var/mongodb/pki/m103-keyfile
```

- Create dbPath directory, for each node:

`mkdir /var/mongodb/db/{1,2,3}`

- Config file node 1

```yml
storage:
    dbPath: /var/mongodb/db/1
net:
    port: 27001
    bindIp: localhost, 192.168.103.100
security:
    authorization: enabled
    keyFile: /var/mongodb/pki/m103-keyfile
systemLog:
    destination: file
    path: /var/mongodb/db/mongod1.log
    logAppend: true
processManagement:
    fork: true
replication:
    replSetName: m103-repl
```

- Config file node 2

```yml
storage:
    dbPath: /var/mongodb/db/2
net:
    port: 27002
    bindIp: localhost, 192.168.103.100
security:
    authorization: enabled
    keyFile: /var/mongodb/pki/m103-keyfile
systemLog:
    destination: file
    path: /var/mongodb/db/mongod2.log
    logAppend: true
processManagement:
    fork: true
replication:
    replSetName: m103-repl
```

- Config file node 3

```yml
storage:
    dbPath: /var/mongodb/db/3
net:
    port: 27003
    bindIp: localhost, 192.168.103.100
security:
    authorization: enabled
    keyFile: /var/mongodb/pki/m103-keyfile
systemLog:
    destination: file
    path: /var/mongodb/db/mongod3.log
    logAppend: true
processManagement:
    fork: true
replication:
    replSetName: m103-repl
```

- Init replicaset in node 1, connect to first node and run:

`rs.initiate()`

- Verify status.
- Create an user root, start the other two nodes.
- Connect to primary node:

`mongo --host "m103-repl/192.168.103.100:27001" -u m103-admin -p m103-pass --authenticationDatabase "admin"`

- Add the other two nodes:

`rs.add("192.168.103.100:27002")`

`rs.add("192.168.103.100:27003")`

- Verify that members have been successfully added to the replica set.

### Replication Configuration
[More info here.][replicationConfiguration]

- [rs.status()][rsStatus]
    - Reports health on replica set nodes
- [db.isMaster()][dbIsMaster]
    - Describes a node's role in the replica set
- [db.serverStatus({ repl: 1 })][dbServerStatus]
    - Section of the db.serverStatus() output
    - Similar to the output of rs.isMaster()
- [rs.printReplicationInfo()][rsPrintReplicationInfo]
    - Only returns oplog data relative to current node
- [rs.add(host, arbiterOnly)][rsAdd]
    - Adds a member to a replica set.
- [rs.initiate(configuration)][rsInitiate]
    - Initiates a replica set.
- [rs.remove(hostname)][rsRemove]
    - Removes the member described by the hostname parameter from the current replica set.
- [rs.reconfig(configuration, force)][rsReconfig]
    - Reconfigures an existing replica set, overwriting the existing replica set configuration.
- [rs.config()][rsConfig]
    - Returns a document that contains the current replica set configuration.
- [rs.stepDown(StepDownSecs, secondaryCatchUpPeriodSecs)][rsStepDown]
    - Instructs the primary of the replica set to become a secondary.


### Write Concerns
[More info here.][writeConcern]

Write concern describes the level of acknowledgment requested from MongoDB for write operations to a standalone mongod or to replica sets or to sharded clusters.

Write concern can include the following fields:
```js
    { w: "<value>", j: "<boolean>", wtimeout: "<number>" }
```

- `w` option to request acknowledgment that the write operation has propagated to a specified number of mongod instances or to mongod instances with specified tags.
    - **0**, Don't wait for acknowledgement.
    - **1** (Default), wait for acknowledgement from the primary only.
    - **2**, wait for acknowledgement from the primary and one or more sencondaries.
    - **majority**, wait for acknowledgement from a majority of replica set members.

- `j` option to request acknowledgment that the write operation has been written to the on-disk journal.

- `wtimeout` option to specify a time limit to prevent write operations from blocking indefinitely.


### Read Concerns
[More info here.][readConcern]

The readConcern option allows you to control the consistency and isolation properties of the data read from replica sets and replica set shards.

```js
 { readConcern: { level: "<level>" } }
```

The following read concern levels are available:
- `local` and `available`
    - The query returns data from the instance with no guarantee that the data has been written to a majority of the replica set members.
    - No durability guarantee.
    - FAST and LATEST data.


- `majority`
    - The query returns the data that has been acknowledged by a majority of the replica set members.
    - Reads are not guaranteed to be the latest written data.
    - FAST and SAFE data.

- `linearizable`
    - The query returns data that reflects all successful majority-acknowledged writes that completed prior to the start of the read operation.
    - Reads may be slower than other read concern.
    - Single document reads only.
    - SAFE and LATEST data.


### Read Preferences
[More info here.][readPreference]

Read preference describes how MongoDB clients route read operations to the members of a replica set. By default, an application directs its read operations to the primary member in a replica set.

Modes:
- `primary` (default)
    - All operations read from the current replica set primary.
    - Secondaries are for availability only.

- `primaryPreferred`
    - In most situations, operations read from the primary but if it is unavailable, operations read from secondary members.
    - Possible to read stale data.

- `secondary`
    - All operations read from the secondary members of the replica set.
    - Possible to read stale data.

- `secondaryPreferred`
    - In most situations, operations read from secondary members but if no secondary members are available, operations read from the primary.
    - Possible to read stale data.

- `nearest`
    - Operations read from member of the replica set with the least network latency, irrespective of the member’s type.
    - Possible to read stale data.


## Sharding
[More info here.][sharding]

- Config file node 1

```yml
sharding:
    clusterRole: configsvr
storage:
    dbPath: /var/mongodb/db/csrs1
net:
    port: 26001
    bindIp: localhost, 192.168.103.100
security:
    authorization: enabled
    keyFile: /var/mongodb/pki/m103-keyfile
systemLog:
    destination: file
    path: /var/mongodb/db/csrs1/mongod.log
    logAppend: true
processManagement:
    fork: true
replication:
    replSetName: m103-csrs
```

- Config file node 2

```yml
sharding:
    clusterRole: configsvr
storage:
    dbPath: /var/mongodb/db/csrs2
net:
    port: 26002
    bindIp: localhost, 192.168.103.100
security:
    authorization: enabled
    keyFile: /var/mongodb/pki/m103-keyfile
systemLog:
    destination: file
    path: /var/mongodb/db/csrs2/mongod.log
    logAppend: true
processManagement:
    fork: true
replication:
    replSetName: m103-csrs
```

- Config file node 3

```yml
sharding:
    clusterRole: configsvr
storage:
    dbPath: /var/mongodb/db/csrs3
net:
    port: 26003
    bindIp: localhost, 192.168.103.100
security:
    authorization: enabled
    keyFile: /var/mongodb/pki/m103-keyfile
systemLog:
    destination: file
    path: /var/mongodb/db/csrs3/mongod.log
    logAppend: true
processManagement:
    fork: true
replication:
    replSetName: m103-csrs
```

- Connect to one of the config servers: `mongo --port 26001`

- Initiating the CSRS: `rs.initiate()`

- Creating super user on CSRS:
```js
use admin
db.createUser({
  user: "m103-admin",
  pwd: "m103-pass",
  roles: [
    {role: "root", db: "admin"}
  ]
})
```

- Authenticating as the super user: `db.auth("m103-admin", "m103-pass")``

- Add the second and third node to the CSRS:
```js
rs.add("192.168.103.100:26002")
rs.add("192.168.103.100:26003")
```

- Mongos config:
```yml
sharding:
    configDB: m103-csrs/192.168.103.100:26001
security:
    keyFile: /var/mongodb/pki/m103-keyfile
net:
    bindIp: localhost,192.168.103.100
    port: 26000
systemLog:
    destination: file
    path: /var/mongodb/db/mongos.log
    logAppend: true
processManagement:
    fork: true
```

- Launch as mongos: `mongos -f mongos.conf`

- Connect to mongos:
`mongo --port 26000 --username m103-admin --password m103-pass --authenticationDatabase admin`

- Check sharding status: `sh.status()`


### Shard key
Shard key fields must be indexed
- Indexes must exist first before you can select the idexed fields for your shard key

Shard keys are immutable
- You cannot change the shard key fields port-sharding
- You cannot change the values of the shard key fields post-sharding

Shard keys are permanent
- You cannot unshard a sharded collection


### How to shard
1. Use `sh.enableSharding("database")` to enable sharding for the specified database
2. Use `db.collection.createIndex()` to create the index for your shard key fields
3. Use `sh.shardCollection("database.collection", { shard key })` to shard the collection


### Picking a good shard key
The goal is a shard key whose values provides good write distribution.
- High Cardinality (lots of unique possible values)
- Low Frequency (very little repetition of those unique values)
- Non-Monotonically changing (non-linear change in values)

Sharding is a permanent operation
- You cannot unshard a collection once sharded
- You cannot update the shard key of a sharded collection
- You cannot update the values of the shard key for any document in the sharded collection
- Test your shard keys in a stating environment first before sharding in production environments


### Chunks
- Logical groups of documents
- Can only live at one designated shard at a time
- Shard key cardinality/frequency, chunk size will determine number of chunks


### Queries in a sharded cluster
[More info here.][shardQueries1]

Sort, Limit and Skip
- sort()
    - The mongos pushes the sort to each shard and merge-sorts the results
- limit()
    - The mongos passes the limit to each shard, then re-applies the limit to the merged set of results
- skip()
    - The mongos performs the skip against the merged set of results


[dbAdmin]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/built-in-roles#dbAdmin
[userAdmin]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/built-in-roles#userAdmin
[dbOwner]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/built-in-roles#dbOwner
[mongodump]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/program/mongodump
[mongorestore]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/program/mongorestore
[mongostat]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/program/mongostat
[mongoexport]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/program/mongoexport
[mongoimport]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/program/mongoimport
[replicationConfiguration]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/replica-configuration/
[rsAdd]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/rs.add/
[rsStatus]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/rs.status/
[rsPrintReplicationInfo]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/rs.printReplicationInfo
[dbIsMaster]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/db.isMaster
[dbServerStatus]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/db.serverStatus/
[rsInitiate]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/rs.initiate/
[rsRemove]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/rs.remove/
[rsReconfig]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/rs.reconfig/
[rsConfig]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/rs.conf/
[rsStepDown]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/rs.stepDown/
[writeConcern]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/write-concern/
[readConcern]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/read-concern/
[readPreference]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/read-preference/
[shardQueries1]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/aggregation-pipeline-sharded-collections/
[sharding]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/sharding/